Volume type standard (#351)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0112-v1-volume-type-standard.md

---
title: Volume Type Standard
type: Standard
status: Draft
track:  IaaS
---

## Introduction

Volume Types are used to classify volumes and provide a basic decision for what kind of volume should be created. These volume types can sometimes be very backend-specific and it might be hard for a user to choose the most suitable volume type, if there is more than one default type.

### Glossary

The following special terms are used throughout this standard document:
| Term | Meaning |
|---|---|

> | volume | OpenStack object, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend |

Author: ```suggestion
| volume | OpenStack ressource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend |
```

| AZ | Availability Zone |
| Volume QoS | Quality of Service object for Volumes |

## Motivation

> We want to standardize a few varieties of volume types. While a user can choose simple things like size when creating a volume, Volume Types define a few broader aspects of volume. Encryption of volumes for example is solely decided by the volume type. While the option with which the volume will be replicated is a mix between definition in the volume type and backend specific configuration, but it's visibility can only be reached in the volume type. In the following part, we want to state, which varieties of volume types are REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or only OPTIONAL within an SCS-compatible deployment.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
We want to standardize a few varieties of volume types. While a user can choose simple things like size when creating a volume, Volume Types define a few broader aspects of a volume. Encryption of volumes for example is solely decided by the volume type. While the option with which the volume will be replicated is a mix between definition in the volume type and backend specific configuration, but it's visibility can only be reached in the volume type. In the following part, we want to state, which varieties of volume types are REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or only OPTIONAL within an SCS-compatible deployment.
```

## Design Considerations

All Considerations can be looked up in detail in the Decision Record for the Volume Type Standard.

To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard and whether it is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions.

| Aspect | Standardize? | Discoverability | comments |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ------ |

> | encryption | **Recommended** | admin only | Upstream work for extra_spec: encrypted=True/False needed |

Author: as soon as there is more than just some discussions at a ptg, i will add a link to a spec or patch.

> To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard and whether it is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard. Furthermore the table shows, according to the current upstream implementation, whether the feature is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions.
```

> | encryption | **Recommended** | admin only | Upstream work for extra_spec: encrypted=True/False needed |

Reviewer 2: Why is should the aspect, if a volume is encrypted or not, only be discoverable by role `admin`?

| Backend name | - | - | - |
| AZs | **Optional** | - | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help |
| multiattach | **Optional** | yes | - |
| Replication | **Recommended** | backend-dependend | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help |
| Number of Replicas, etc | **Optional** | backend-dependend | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help |
| Volume QoS | **Optional** | admin only | depends on the admin only volume qos object |

In addition it is possible to use multiple of those aspects within one volume type. SCS will only ever look, if there is a volume type that has an aspect, but they don't have to be different volume types.
Example: one volume type that uses LUKS-encryption with a ceph storage with inherent replication would fulfill all recommendations of this standard.

## DEFAULT volume types

> There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS will does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment.
```

> There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment.

Reviewer 2: How is this "default" volume type called? This should be standardized in SCS clouds.

Reviewer 2: I understand your point and we should add your explanations to the standard. IMO, the standard does not point out explicitly, that using no volume type, implies _default_ volume type is used, and the user can not expect any specific properties the default volume will have.

```suggestion
There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.  
```

> There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.  

Author: ```suggestion
There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.
```

+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| access_project_ids | None                                                                                                                                                         |
| description        | None                                                                                                                                                         |
| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | LUKS                                                                                                                                                         |

> | properties         | encrypted='true'                                                                                                                                             |

Author: I renamed it in the test above.

> | properties         | encrypted='true'                                                                                                                                             |

Author: could you resolve the change request? I edited the document, but not in the table here.

```

### Replication

Replication states, whether or not there are multiple replicas of a volume. Thus answers the question, whether the data could survive a node outage. Unfortunately there are two ways replication can be achieved:

1. In the configuration of a volume type. It then is visible as extra_spec in the properties of a volume type.
2. Via the used backend. Ceph for example provides automatic replication, that does not need to be specified in the volume type. This is currently not visible for users.

To fulfill this recommentation for now, the deployer needs to state the replication in the description of a volume type in the following way:
The description needs to begin with `[replicated]`, after that any further description is allowed.

**TODO:**
We want to find a way to also use the internal extra_spec for replication, when the replication is automatically done by the backend. If this is not possible, we would like to introduce another property, which has to be set by the admin, when setting the volume type. Only after that we will have the possibility to automatically check for a volume type with replication.

#### OPTIONAL addition: Number of Replicas

> Additionally to the fact, that a volume type is replicated, it OPTIONALLY can be stated in the description or name, how many times the provisioned volume will be replicated.

Reviewer 2: Please add an example.

Author: The example is right below, if you think, that is not sufficient i will add another one.

### Example

One volume type that is configured as an encrypted volume type in a ceph backend, with automated replication would fit both recommendations and will be enough to comply to this part of the volume type standard.

It should look like the following part:

```text
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Field              | Value                                                                                                                                                        |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| access_project_ids | None                                                                                                                                                         |

> | description        | [encrypted][replicated] Content will be replicated three times to ensure consistency and availability for your data. LUKS encryption is used.                |

Reviewer 2: Please make the order of the keyword encrypted, replicated, number of replicas, ... in volume's description and name explicitly, similar to [flavor naming standard](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0100-v3-flavor-naming.md#complete-proposal-for-systematic-flavor-naming).

Author: 1. I doubt that optional parameters like the number of replicas will ever be made a required standard. From my discussion with csps I think, they will stay optional. Therefore I would not like to include them into some keyword standard. But it should be enough if it is stated in the description.
2. That leaves us with only two aspects to standardize: [encrypted] and [replicated]. They both can occur together or alone. So possible beginnings for the description would be:
     - [encrypted]
     - [replicated]
     - [encrypted][replicated]
     - [replicated][encrypted]
3. We only recommend, that both required aspects are present, but not whether they should be combined or can be stand alone. That makes it harder to require a certain sequence.

So if you insist on having a special sequence I would add this, but I don't see any positive side effects from this.

Reviewer 2: The positive side effect of having a dedicated order of keywords is at user side, IMO. As volume type properties are currently defined as string, a cloud service consumer has to parse strings in order to find a volume type with special behavior or properties. Having a standardized order, string parsing will be facilitated.

Reviewer: @anjastrunk do you have a particular language in mind that relies on a certain order of arguments to facilitate string parsing?

imho most languages nowadays support some kind of simple pattern matching where the order is not that important?

overall I have no strong opinion if we should enforce the order, but we maybe should in either case explicitly define if this string is ordered or unordered.

Reviewer 3: @anjastrunk please comment

Reviewer 4: The text in the paragraphs above clearly states:

> The description needs to begin with `[encrypted]` ...

> The description needs to begin with `[replicated]` ...

Well, only one of these can be true. This does need some more work!

Author: I adjusted the document so that a special order is required now.

Reviewer 2: @fkr You are right, regular expression will not require any order. So I'm fine with extending the standard by adding, that key word are unordered.

| name               | hdd-three-replicas-LUKS                                                                                                                                      |
| properties         |                                                                                                                                                              |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## OPTIONAL volume types

In this section volume types are described, that we do not want to explicitly recommend, but find them worth listing as optional for deployers.

### Availability Zones

Availability Zones are not necessarily used by every deployer of a cloud. The SCS does not want do make it necessary to have AZs for a compatible deployment. But we want to encourage deployer who use multiple AZs to read the following:

> While there can be multiple Compute AZs, there can also be multiple Storage AZs for Volumes. And it might be not quite confusing for users, which volumes can be used in which AZs. To make it even further complicated, there are backends like ceph, which can provide volumes for multiple compute AZs just with some Nova configuration. Therefore we would encourage to use either the property of volume types OR the description of the volume types to describe, in which AZs the volumes based on this type can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there can be multiple Compute AZs, there can also be multiple Storage AZs for Volumes. And it might be quite confusing for users, which volumes can be used in which AZs. To make it even further complicated, there are backends like ceph, which can provide volumes for multiple compute AZs just with some Nova configuration. Therefore we would encourage to use either the property of volume types OR the description of the volume types to describe, in which AZs the volumes based on this type can be used.
```

| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | hdd-three-replicas-AZ134                                                                                                                                     |
| properties         |                                                                                                                                                              |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### Multiattach

> A few backends enable providers to allow volumes to be attached to mulitple VMs simultaneously. The OpenStack API can be used to enable the usage of multiattach through the volume type. The property is also automatically shown to users. If a deployer want to use this feature they have to do it in this way. So users will always see whether a volume type can be used for mulitattach volumes or not. Nevertheless due to other problems, that might occur when using the multiattach feature, the SCS will only have this as OPTIONAL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few backends enable providers to allow volumes to be attached to mulitple VMs simultaneously. The OpenStack API can be used to enable the usage of multiattach through the volume type. The property is also automatically shown to users. If a deployer wants to use this feature they have to do it in this way. So users will always see whether a volume type can be used for mulitattach volumes or not. Nevertheless due to other problems, that might occur when using the multiattach feature, the SCS standard will only recommend|require(?) this as OPTIONAL.
```

which problems exactly? maybe add a link describing them if it's too long for the standard document.

### Volume QoS

> Quality of Service for volumes can be defined in volume qos objects. While admins can use these directly on volumes, a user is not able to see these object. Instead there can be ONE volume qos object associated to a volume type, which is then be used on all volumes created from that volume type. Through this indirection, functioning volume types without these associated qos objects and this feature not being heavily used, the SCS will currently only state this as an OPTIONAL volume type feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quality of Service for volumes can be defined in volume qos objects. While admins can use these directly on volumes, a user is not able to see these objects. Instead there can be ONE volume qos object associated to a volume type, which is then be used on all volumes created from that volume type. Through this indirection, functioning volume types without these associated qos objects and this feature not being heavily used, the SCS will currently only state this as an OPTIONAL recommended(?) volume type feature.
```

> To make users aware that a volume type includes specific qos options, we reccomend to write it into the description of a volume type, as any association to a volume qos object cannot be seen by normal users:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make users aware that a volume type includes specific qos options, we recommend to write it into the description of a volume type, as any association to a volume qos object cannot be seen by normal users:
```

It is not clear from the text if we recommend this exact naming from the example or if the naming can be arbitrary chosen.

| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | hdd-three-replicas-AZ134                                                                                                                                     |
| properties         |
                                  |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Related Documents

[Here is the decision record document.](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0111-v1-volume-type-decisions.md)

## Conformance Tests

> As there are currently no REQUIRED volume types, we can only look for the RECOMMENDED aspects and thus executing a conformance test is not a must.

Reviewer 2: Now I'm confused. In line 44 you wrote, that there is always a default volume type. Doesn't this mean, that there is a required volume type?

Author: no. The default volume type is necessary through openstack. Like a server that always has a flavor, a volume always needs a volume type. But to be backward compatible the volume type must not needed to be specified. That requires the presence of a "default" volume type in openstack, but not in scs.

### Glossary

The following special terms are used throughout this standard document:
| Term | Meaning |
|---|---|
| volume | OpenStack ressource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend |
| AZ | Availability Zone |
| Volume QoS | Quality of Service object for Volumes |

## Motivation

We want to standardize a few varieties of volume types. While a user can choose simple things like size when creating a volume, Volume Types define a few broader aspects of a volume. Encryption of volumes for example is solely decided by the volume type. While the option with which the volume will be replicated is a mix between definition in the volume type and backend specific configuration, but it's visibility can only be reached in the volume type. In the following part, we want to state, which varieties of volume types are REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or only OPTIONAL within an SCS-compatible deployment.

## Design Considerations

All Considerations can be looked up in detail in the [Decision Record for the Volume Type Standard.](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0111-v1-volume-type-decisions.md)

> To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard. Furthermore the table shows, according to the current upstream implementation, whether the feature is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions. The last column says how the standard is handled, which is currently through the addition of a stadardized phrase at the beginning of the description of a volume type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard. Furthermore the table shows, according to the current upstream implementation, whether the feature is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions. The last column says how the standard is handled, which is currently through the addition of a standardized phrase at the beginning of the description of a volume type.
```

+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

We want to find a way to also use the internal extra_spec for replication, when the replication is automatically done by the backend. If this is not possible, we would like to introduce another property, which has to be set by the admin, when setting the volume type. Only after that we will have the possibility to automatically check for a volume type with replication.

## DEFAULT volume types

There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.

The parameters of volume types described in this standard do not have to be applied to the chosen default volume type. And the SCS will not make any assumptions about parameters being present in the default volume type.

## REQUIRED volume types

> Currently the SCS will not require volume types with certain specification. This might change in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the SCS will not require volume types with certain specification. This will change in the future.
```

imho this will certainly change, no? otherwise, what's the point of the standard?

---
title: Volume Type Standard
type: Standard
status: Draft
track:  IaaS
---

## Introduction

Volume Types are used to classify volumes and provide a basic decision for what kind of volume should be created. These volume types can sometimes be very backend-specific and it might be hard for a user to choose the most suitable volume type, if there is more than one default type.

### Glossary

The following special terms are used throughout this standard document:
| Term | Meaning |
|---|---|
| volume | OpenStack ressource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend |
| AZ | Availability Zone |
| Volume QoS | Quality of Service object for Volumes |

## Motivation

> We want to standardize a few varieties of volume types. While a user can choose simple things like size when creating a volume, Volume Types define a few broader aspects of a volume. Encryption of volumes for example is solely decided by the volume type. While the option with which the volume will be replicated is a mix between definition in the volume type and backend specific configuration, but it's visibility can only be reached in the volume type. In the following part, we want to state, which varieties of volume types are REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or only OPTIONAL within an SCS-compatible deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to standardize a few varieties of volume types. While a user can choose simple things like size when creating a volume, Volume Types define a few broader aspects of a volume. Encryption of volumes for example is solely decided by the volume type. While the option with which the volume will be replicated is a mix between definition in the volume type and backend specific configuration, but it's visibility can only be reached in the volume type. In the following part, we want to state, which varieties of volume types are REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or only OPTIONAL within a SCS-compatible deployment.
```

## Design Considerations

All Considerations can be looked up in detail in the [Decision Record for the Volume Type Standard.](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0111-v1-volume-type-decisions.md)

To test whether a deployment has volume types with certain aspects, the discoverability of the parameters in the volume type has to be given. The following table shows, which aspects are considered in this standard. Furthermore the table shows, according to the current upstream implementation, whether the feature is discoverable, and who can discover this. The comments state what can be done to help with the discoverability and other important restrictions. The last column says how the standard is handled, which is currently through the addition of a standardized phrase at the beginning of the description of a volume type.

> | Aspect | Part of Standard | Discoverability | comments | concluded standardized description |

Reviewer 2: Content of this table needs refinement:

- What does "Upstream work for ..." mean? Does this means, that upstream is currently working on this feature **or**   that this feature has to be implemented by someone else. Does "Upstream: setable (Typo?) ..." mean the same? 
- "backend-dependent" is too generic and does not answer the question of discoverability. A reference to more details would be helpful.
-  Discoverability: Does "yes" mean, that everybody can discover this property?

Just a minor request for change in favor of visibility: Either use lower-case upper case in column "Aspect" don't mix both.

Author: The table changed within the last commits.

| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ------ |
| encryption | **Recommended** | admin only | Upstream work for extra_spec: encrypted=True/False needed | **"[encrypted]"** |
| Replication | **Recommended** | backend-dependend | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help | **"[replicated]"** |
| AZs | **Optional** | - | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help | - |
| multiattach | **Optional** | yes | - | - |
| Number of Replicas, etc | **Optional** | backend-dependend | Upstream: setable extra_spec would help | - |
| Volume QoS | **Optional** | admin only | depends on the admin only volume qos object | - |
| Backend name | no | - | - | - |

> In addition it is possible to use multiple of those aspects within one volume type. SCS will only ever look, if there is a volume type that has an aspect, but they don't have to be different volume types.

Reviewer 2: Typo? 

```suggestion
In addition it is possible to use multiple of those aspects within one volume type. SCS will only ever look, if there is a volume type that has an aspect, but there don't have to be different volume types.
```

Example: one volume type that uses LUKS-encryption with a ceph storage with inherent replication would fulfill all recommendations of this standard.

> The current downside is that users without admin rights currently cannot see the recommended aspects. We want and need to change this in the OpenStack workflow through adding discoverable properties (e.g. "encrypted"="true" and "replicated"="true") that are also visible for users. This way we will be able to automatically check whether a volume type with encyrption and or replication is present. It should look like this example for encryption:

Reviewer 2: I would not use first person plural. And I would not write, that SCS will extend OpenStack. I would just point out, that an extension in OpenStack is required, to support/fulfill this standard.

| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | LUKS                                                                                                                                                         |
| properties         | encrypted='true'                                                                                                                                             |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

> We want to find a way to also use the internal extra_spec for replication, when the replication is automatically done by the backend. If this is not possible, we would like to introduce another property, which has to be set by the admin, when setting the volume type. Only after that we will have the possibility to automatically check for a volume type with replication.

Reviewer 2: This does not belong to this standard. It should be outsources in an own issue.

Author: done issue is #449

## DEFAULT volume types

> There is always a default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is always one default volume type defined in an OpenStack deployment. The SCS does not have any requirements about this volume type at this moment, instead deployers are free to choose what fits best in their environment. Conversely, a cloud user can not expect any specific behavior or properties from default volume types.
```

## REQUIRED volume types

Currently the SCS will not require volume types with certain specification. This will change in the future.

## RECOMMENDED volume types

The SCS recommends to have one or more volume types, that satisfy the need for encrpytion and replication. These are all allowed possibilites for those recommended volume types:

| Volume Type Nr | Type Name | Volume Type Description |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 1 | `__DEFAULT__` | `[encrypted][replicated] Volumes will be encrypted and three times replicated` |
| 2 | `LUKS` | `[encrypted] This volume type creates LUKS encryped volumes` |
| 3 | `replicated` | `[replicated] Volumes will be three times replicated` |

The standardized phrases are `[encrypted]` and `[replicated]`. They MUST appear at the beginning of the description of the volume type and they MUST be ordered alphabetically. Having only volume type number 1 would be enough to fulfill all recommendations. Having only volume types 2 and 3 together would also satisfy all recommendations

### Encryption

> Encryption for volumes is an option which has to be configured within the volume type. As an admin it is possible to set encryption-provider, key size, cipher and control location. And for admins it is also currently possible to see these configurations in a volume type with both list and show commands.

Reviewer 2: As this standard RECOMMENDs encrypted volumes, is MUST make recommendations at least for cipher and key-size as well. Cloud customers will buy a pig a poke otherwise.

Reviewer: well I just want to point out: we did debate this during one of the calls - I don't remember when exactly - and I also voiced concerns regarding this.

I can't remember the details (like "why"), but it was agreed upon to explicitly _not_ encode details about the used encryption scheme into the standard.

| description        | [encrypted] This volume uses LUKS-encryption                                                                                                                 |
| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | LUKS                                                                                                                                                         |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### Replication

> Replication states, whether or not there are multiple replicas of a volume. Thus answers the question, whether the data could survive a node outage. Unfortunately there are two ways replication can be achieved:

Reviewer 2: In line 79, you define replicated volumes MUST be replicated three times. Here,  you dilute this requirement. This standard must be consistent and I recommend to add the number of replicas here as well.

Reviewer: as was discussed during a meeting regarding this standard:

There is currently no way to discover the replication factor used by the most used backend (ceph).

I believe this is even mentioned somewhere in the prelude of the standard, at least in some earlier iterations it was there.

Regardless, given the above facts, I don't think it makes sense to standardize a certain number of replicas, given that we can't test this.

Author: line 79 does only provide examples of possible volume types. Maybe this should be stated more clearly.

The number of replicas is difficult to get, because there are two ways replication can be achieved that exclude each other. 

1. Replication can be set in the volume type. There you can see the information that the volume will be replicated and the Number of Replicas OpenStack will set.
2. Performancewise it is better to let replication happen in the backend itself and not having the need of OpenStack caring about it. Ceph e.g. does it on its own. It is set in the configuration of ceph (https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rados/operations/pools/), where also the number of replicas can be set on a per pool base. So it is not possible for OpenStack to get the information (at least for now, but I do think this will be really hard to get into the volume type database of OpenStack.). The way we do have right now, is that the operator creating or editing the volume type with the ceph backend, will write down the information in the description field.

In conclusion I think the number of replicas would be really nice to have, but maybe will be too hard to get at all.

| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | hdd-three-replicas-LUKS                                                                                                                                      |
| properties         |                                                                                                                                                              |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## OPTIONAL volume types

In this section volume types are described, that we do not want to explicitly recommend, but find them worth listing as optional for deployers.

### Availability Zones

> Availability Zones are not necessarily used by every deployer of a cloud. The SCS does not want do make it necessary to have AZs for a compatible deployment. But we want to encourage deployer who use multiple AZs to read the following:

Reviewer 2: I read "deployer" several time throughout this standard. I doubt if this role fits best. Other standards distinguish between provider and consumer, only.  If this standard uses "deployer", this role has to be introduced beforehand.

Author: maybe that is from my perspective as openstack-developer: I only see the interacting roles, and not the business roles. I can edit the standard, but would also like to agree on certain terms beforehand.

| properties         |                                                                                                                                                              |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### Multiattach

A few backends enable providers to allow volumes to be attached to mulitple VMs simultaneously. The OpenStack API can be used to enable the usage of multiattach through the volume type. The property is also automatically shown to users. If a deployer wants to use this feature they have to do it in this way. So users will always see whether a volume type can be used for mulitattach volumes or not. Nevertheless due to other problems, that might occur when using the multiattach feature such as the requirement of special file systems and suitable backends, the SCS standard will only view this as OPTIONAL.

### Volume QoS

> Quality of Service parameters for volumes can be defined in a volume qos object. While admins can use these qos objects directly on volumes, a user is not able to see such an object. Instead there can be ONE volume qos object associated to a volume type, which is then be used on all volumes created from that volume type. Through this indirection, volume types also working without these associated qos objects and this feature not being heavily used, the SCS standard will currently only view this as an OPTIONAL volume type feature.

Reviewer 2: >  While admins can use these qos objects directly on volumes

I do not understand this sentences. Can an admin define QoS objects for volumes directly? If so, how does the underlying infrastructure reflect this QoS? To reduce potential of confusion, I would remove this sentence and focus on user user only.

  ```suggestion
Quality of Service parameters for volumes can be defined in a volume QoSs object by admins. A user is not able to see such QoS objects. Instead there can be ONE volume QoS object associated to a volume type only, which is then be used on all volumes created from that volume type. Through this indirection, volume types also working without these associated QoS objects and this feature not being heavily used, the SCS standard will currently only view this as an OPTIONAL volume type feature.
```

Author: Okay so this seem to need further explanation:

`volume qos` is an extra ressource (or object) in openstack. Administrators can use it on volumes directly. Normal user ar not able to see these objects. So to use `volume qos` objects or QoS for volumes in general , an administrator has to create a `volume qos` object and associate it with a volume type (only one qos object per type). It is then applied to every volume created with this volume type. BUT still only admins are able to see the associated `volume qos` id in the volume type.

I think I will rephrase the fist sentences.

Author: optional aspects were removed from this standard - so this is no longer part of it.
